CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: EI25-45076
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Endocrine/Metabolic / Obesity
Treatment Category: Gen Surg Proc / Bariatric Surgery
IMR Type: Experimental/Investigational
Patient: age 31 to 40, gender Female
Days to review: 15     Days to adopt: 101
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: A patient has requested authorization and coverage for endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty (ESG). Standard therapy for this patient’s condition includes the consideration of weight loss surgery (e.g., gastric bypass). However, a meta-analysis shows that ESG is a safe and effective method for weight loss, and is comparable to weight loss surgery, which carries the risk of a surgical approach. ESG has been shown to be a safe and effective treatment for obesity, with durable long-term outcomes, and is now considered a reliable treatment option for obesity. In this case, the patient has a history of obesity with a body mass index (BMI) above 50 kg/m2. The patient has failed to achieve sufficient weight loss with lifestyle management and lap band. Thus, the requested ESG is supported as beneficial for this patient. Accordingly, the requested ESG is likely to be more beneficial for treatment of the patient’s condition than any available standard therapy. Findings: Two of the three reviewers found that the requested service is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy.Final Result: The reviewers determined that the requested service is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: Reviewer 1 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certification in gastroenterology and is actively practicing. Reviewer 2 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certification in gastroenterology and is actively practicing. Reviewer 3 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certification in gastroenterology and is actively practicing. The reviewers are experts in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
