CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45060
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Autism Spectrum / Autistic Disorder
Treatment Category: DME / Incontinence Supplies
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 0 to 10, gender Female
Days to review: 19     Days to adopt: 94
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: The parent of a patient has requested authorization and coverage for incontinence wipes. On review of the current medical literature, bladder and bowel incontinence are commonly associated with pediatric patients with global developmental delays. There are many challenges to proper toilet training in this patient population. Generally, behavioral approaches are used with varying efficacy depending on patient characteristics such as age and severity of the underlying developmental disability. In this case, the patient has a history of severe autism and incontinence. Incontinence wipes are requested to promote physical and mental health and efficiency by keeping the patient sanitary. The incontinence wipes are used to ameliorate physical and behavioral conditions of autism and incontinence. All told, the requested incontinence wipes are medically necessary to achieve or maintain age-appropriate growth and development, attain, regain or maintain functional capacity, and improve, support or maintain the patient’s current health condition. Final Result: The reviewer determined that the requested equipment is medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in neurology with special qualification in child neurology and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
