CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45081
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Genetic Diseases / Other
Treatment Category: DME / Other
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 31 to 40, gender Female
Days to review: 2     Days to adopt: 15
Determination: Upheld Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: A patient has requested authorization and coverage for a foldable portable electric Hoyer lift. In this case, the patient has a history of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, club feet, and scoliosis. The patient requires a wheelchair for mobility and is non-ambulatory. However, there is limited clinical documentation regarding the patient’s level of independence with transfers and the need for a lift for caregivers to perform transfers. In addition, a review of the record reveals no clinical documentation provided indicating why the patient’s transfer needs cannot be met with a standard mechanical Hoyer lift. As such, the foldable portable electric Hoyer lift is not necessary to prevent significant illness or significant disability, or alleviate severe pain through the diagnosis or treatment of disease, illness, or injury. In addition, the foldable portable electric Hoyer lift is not necessary to achieve age-appropriate growth and development, and attain, maintain, or regain functional capacity. Therefore, the requested foldable portable electric Hoyer lift is not medically necessary for the treatment of the patient.Final Result: The reviewer determined that the equipment is not medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be upheld.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in physical medicine and rehabilitation and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
