CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45356
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Autism Spectrum / Autistic Disorder
Treatment Category: DME / Special Bed
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 0 to 10, gender Male
Days to review: 2     Days to adopt: 24
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: The patient’s parent has requested authorization and coverage for a specialized bed. Pediatric patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who demonstrate elopement and lack of danger awareness are at increased risk for injury and adverse health outcomes. Preventive environmental modifications, such as specialized beds, are recognized as necessary interventions to ensure safety, support sleep hygiene, and facilitate optimal growth and development in this patient population. The American Academy of Pediatrics and other expert consensus highlight that interventions recommended by treating physicians for pediatric patients with disabilities should be provided if they are necessary to ameliorate or prevent worsening of health conditions. Although specific clinical criteria for bed prescription in ASD are not detailed in the medical literature, the use of environmental modifications, including specialized beds, is consistent with best practices for managing elopement risk and supporting health in pediatric patients with ASD. In this case, the patient has ASD with a history of elopement and lack of awareness of danger. In this patient’s clinical scenario, the requested specialized bed is required to achieve or maintain age-appropriate growth and development, functional capacity, or improve, support, or maintain the patient’s current health condition. Therefore, the requested specialized bed is medically necessary for the treatment of this patient.Final Result: The reviewer determined that the requested equipment is medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in neurology with special qualification in child neurology and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
