CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: EI25-45314
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Cancer / Neuroendocrine
Treatment Category: Special Proc / Organ Transplant
IMR Type: Experimental/Investigational
Patient: age 41 to 50, gender Female
Days to review: 6     Days to adopt: 14
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: A patient has requested authorization and coverage for a liver transplant. Metastatic carcinoid or neuroendocrine tumor is a rare cancer that is generally not responsive to cytotoxic chemotherapy. This patient has a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor that is currently restricted to the liver. Since this patient's diagnosis, the patient’s medical care has very closely adhered to National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guideline recommendations. However, at this time, the patient has exhausted all standard treatment options and is therefore being considered for transplant. A liver transplant is a reasonable next step for this patient who has tried and failed several standard therapies. There are clinical studies showing significant survival rates for patients undergoing liver transplantation for neuroendocrine liver metastasis. For these reasons, the requested liver transplant is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of this patient’s condition than any available standard therapy. Findings: Two of the three reviewers found that the requested procedure is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy.Final Result: The reviewers determined that the requested procedure is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: Reviewer 1 is board-certified in medical oncology with subspecialty certification in hematology and is actively practicing. Reviewer 2 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certifications in hematology and medical oncology and is actively practicing. Reviewer 3 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certifications in hematology and medical oncology and is actively practicing. The reviewers are experts in the treatment of the patient’s medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
