CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45147
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Endocrine/Metabolic / Lipedema (Lipoedema)
Treatment Category: Reconstr/Plast Proc / Liposuction
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 41 to 50, gender Female
Days to review: 16     Days to adopt: 55
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that a patient has requested authorization and coverage for suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk. Suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk can help improve pain, mobility, and quality of life in individuals. In this case, the patient has diseased lipedema tissue accumulation in multiple areas and demonstrates pain, difficulties with mobility, and diagnostic signs of lipedema despite attempting conservative measures including diet, exercise, compression garments, and manual lymphatic drainage. The literature supports the use of lipectomy surgery in this clinical scenario. As such, the requested suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk is necessary to prevent significant disability and alleviate severe pain through the treatment of a disease. In addition, the requested suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk is necessary to attain, maintain, or regain functional capacity. For these reasons, the requested suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk is medically necessary for the treatment of this patient.The California Reconstructive Surgery Statute requires health insurers to cover reconstructive surgeries, defined as surgery performed to correct or repair abnormal structures of the body caused by congenital defects, developmental abnormalities, trauma, infection, tumors, or disease to do either of the following: (1) to improve function, (2) to create a normal appearance, to the extent possible. On review of the records and photographs, the patient’s pattern of fat deposition is consistent with lipedema. The patient’s fat deposition constitutes an abnormal structure of the body caused by a developmental abnormality. Moreover, the records document that the requested suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk would be performed to improve function by relief of pain and improvement of mobility. Thus, the requested suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk is reconstructive in nature for the treatment of this patient.Therefore, the requested suction assisted lipectomy of the trunk is medically necessary and reconstructive in nature for the treatment of this patient. Final Result: The reviewer determined that the requested procedure is medically necessary and reconstructive in nature for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in plastic surgery and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
