CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: EI25-45116
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Orth/Musculoskeletal / Osteoarthritis
Treatment Category: DME / Other
IMR Type: Experimental/Investigational
Patient: age 51 to 64, gender Male
Days to review: 19     Days to adopt: 67
Determination: Upheld Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that a patient has requested authorization and coverage for the MISHA® knee system implant inserted to the left knee. In this case, the patient was being treated for knee related injuries and issues. The patient presented with left knee pain, but the record establishes that there has been improvement in the symptoms since the last visit. The left side pain is mild and rated low on a pain scale. Detailed documentation of a formal physical therapy course was not evident. Overall, the patient reports improvement in his symptoms over the course of the provided medical examinations. Additionally, a significant worsening of objective deficits is not documented in the records. Further, there are limited large-scale, long-term references showing the safety and efficacy of the requested surgery in this clinical setting. Therefore, the MISHA® knee system implant inserted to the left knee is not likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of this patient. Findings: Three of the three reviewers found that the device is not likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy.Final Result: The reviewers determined that the device is not likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be upheld.Credentials/Qualifications: Reviewer 1 is board-certified in orthopedic surgery and is actively practicing. Reviewer 2 is board-certified in orthopedic surgery and is actively practicing. Reviewer 3 is board-certified in orthopedic surgery and is actively practicing. The reviewers are experts in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
