CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45366
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Endocrine/Metabolic / Hormone Abnormality
Treatment Category: Pharmacy / Hormones
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 11 to 20, gender Male
Days to review: 5     Days to adopt: 10
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: The parent of a patient has requested authorization and coverage for Omnitrope. Children with growth hormone deficiency are usually much shorter than their peers and over time, they tend to drop farther below the normal range. It is important to note that growth hormone-deficient children are not necessarily always below the 3rd percentile for their height; in many cases, the poor growth velocity over time is a marker of growth failure. Clinical practice guidelines on growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) treatment in children and adolescents recommend against reliance on growth hormone provocative test results as the sole diagnostic criterion of growth hormone deficiency. The guidelines suggest detailed individual case-based review when managing a child with short stature. The child in this case has been growing poorly, and the patient’s growth velocity has been decreasing while the patient is in puberty. This patient also has another insufficiency that makes the diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency more probable. The information provided indicates a diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency, and without growth hormone therapy, the patient’s growth velocity will further decelerate, and the patient’s height will be further compromised. Furthermore, when deciding appropriate therapy for children with short stature, psychosocial considerations including psychosocial stressors and peer relationships should be considered. Denying growth hormone therapy can further affect a child’s self-esteem and contribute to mental and behavioral disturbances. In summary, this patient’s presentation meets the criteria for a diagnosis of short stature due to growth hormone deficiency. Therefore, treatment with a U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved growth hormone product, such as Omnitrope, is recommended. All told, the requested Omnitrope is medically necessary for the treatment of this patient. Final Result: The reviewer determined that the requested medication is medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in pediatrics with subspecialty certification in pediatric endocrinology and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient’s medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
