CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: EI25-45140
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Cancer / Neuroendocrine
Treatment Category: Cancer Care / Surgery
IMR Type: Experimental/Investigational
Patient: age 41 to 50, gender Male
Days to review: 7     Days to adopt: 14
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that a patient has requested authorization and coverage for liver transplant surgery. Tumors that spread from the primary site of disease often have a long natural history, but are not generally curable even with treatment. The one possible exception would be for patients with disease that can be safely treated and surgically removed, with prior studies and meta-analysis showing survival benefit to these approaches, including liver transplantation in patients with tumors. In this case, the patient’s prior sites of disease have been treated with no signs of recurrence. All other therapy options are palliative and do not provide the chance of a cure, but liver transplant does. Therefore, the requested liver transplant surgery is likely to be more beneficial for treatment of the patient’s condition than any available standard therapy.Findings: Two of the three reviewers found that the requested service is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy.Final Result: The reviewers determined that the requested service is likely to be more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: Reviewer 1 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certifications in medical oncology and hematology and is actively practicing. Reviewer 2 is board-certified internal medicine with subspecialty certifications in medical oncology and hematology and is actively practicing. Reviewer 3 is board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certifications in medical oncology and hematology and is actively practicing. The reviewers are experts in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
