CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: EI25-45371
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Endocrine/Metabolic / Thyroid Problems
Treatment Category: Elect/Therm/Radfreq / Radiofreq Ablat
IMR Type: Experimental/Investigational
Patient: age 41 to 50, gender Female
Days to review: 21     Days to adopt: 71
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: A patient has requested reimbursement for thyroid radiofrequency ablation (RFA). Studies demonstrate that RFA consistently reduces nodule volume, with median volume reduction rates of 50-76% at 12 months and sustained efficacy up to five years. Solid or predominantly solid, or mixed solid-cystic nodules respond well to RFA. Moreover, the American Thyroid Association (ATA) has acknowledged RFA and other thermal ablation techniques as valid alternatives for a subset of patients with symptomatic benign thyroid nodules, particularly those with compressive complaints or autonomously functioning nodules causing hyperthyroidism. In this case, the patient had a nodule that was cystic and solid, and had been proven to be benign. It was reported to have been causing some compressive symptoms and, therefore, the patient met the criteria for RFA. In conclusion, RFA for the treatment of the patient’s condition is supported as more beneficial than the alternative treatment of observation, and more favorable than surgery. For these reasons, the thyroid RFA was likely to have been more beneficial for the treatment of the patient’s condition than any available standard therapy.Findings: Three of the three reviewers found that the service at issue was likely to have been more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy.Final Result: The reviewers determined that the service at issue was likely to have been more beneficial for the treatment of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: Reviewer 1 is board-certified in endocrinology, diabetes, and metabolism and is actively practicing. Reviewer 2 is board-certified in endocrinology, diabetes, and metabolism and is actively practicing. Reviewer 3 is board-certified in endocrinology, diabetes, and metabolism and is actively practicing. The reviewers are experts in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
