CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45378
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Endocrine/Metabolic / Obesity
Treatment Category: Pharmacy / Weight Control
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 31 to 40, gender Female
Days to review: 13     Days to adopt: 42
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: A patient has requested authorization and coverage for Wegovy. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved Wegovy for chronic weight management in patients diagnosed with obesity or overweight and one weight-related condition. Wegovy is to be used as an adjunct to dietary changes and physical activity. In the STEP 1 clinical trial, patients with obesity or overweight and more than one weight-related condition were treated with either Wegovy or placebo in addition to lifestyle intervention. The authors found that weight loss in patients who were treated with Wegovy was greater than in those who received placebo. Another study found that patients with obesity or overweight who maintained treatment with Wegovy, versus switching to placebo after receiving Wegovy for 20 weeks, continued to experience weight loss over the following 48 weeks. In this case, the patient presents with obesity and weight-related condition of prediabetes. The FDA and medical literature support the use of Wegovy for this patient’s medical conditions. Therefore, the requested Wegovy is medically necessary for the treatment of this patient. Final Result: The reviewer determined that the requested medication is medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in endocrinology, diabetes, and metabolism and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient's medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
