CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45369
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Orth/Musculoskeletal / Other
Treatment Category: DME / Other
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 51 to 64, gender Female
Days to review: 21     Days to adopt: 56
Determination: Upheld Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that Nature of Statutory Criteria/Case Summary: A patient has requested authorization and coverage for a custom ramp. The patient is noted to have impaired mobility and an unsteady gait. A ramp for the patient’s home has been requested. There is insufficient objective clinical documentation supporting the need for a ramp for the patient’s home. The patient is noted to require assistance with ambulation, but no other information is provided regarding the patient’s level of independence with transfers as well as negotiating stairs. No physical examination findings are provided in terms of graded motor strength of the extremities. It is understandable that the patient may perceive a benefit from having a ramp, but there is a lack of objective and functional information that the ramp will significantly improve the patient’s level of independence. The patient is not confined to home without the use of a ramp and power mobility device. Additionally, the potential for a ramp must be assessed in terms of its ability to safely accommodate a power mobility device, such as a power scooter. All told, the requested ramp is not necessary to prevent significant illness or significant disability or alleviate severe pain through the diagnosis or treatment of disease, illness, or injury for this patient. Therefore, the requested custom ramp is not medically necessary for the treatment of this patient. Final Result: The reviewer determined that the requested device is not medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be upheld.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in physical medicine and rehabilitation and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient’s medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
