CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: MN25-45178
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Endocrine/Metabolic / Lipedema (Lipoedema)
Treatment Category: Reconstr/Plast Proc / Liposuction
IMR Type: Medical Necessity
Patient: age 51 to 64, gender Female
Days to review: 9     Days to adopt: 69
Determination: Overturned Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that a patient has requested authorization and coverage for bilateral leg liposuction, anterior thighs, knees and calves, bilateral leg liposuction, posterior thighs, knees and calves, bilateral arm liposuction, liposuction of the left and right hip and buttocks, abdomen liposuction, and excision bilateral tissue of the thighs, calves, hips, buttocks, upper arms, and lower arms. Per the medical records, the patient has symptomatic lipedema of anterior and posterior, legs, thighs, knees, calves, and trunk. Therefore, bilateral leg liposuction, anterior thighs, knees and calves, bilateral leg liposuction, posterior thighs, knees and calves, bilateral arm liposuction, and liposuction of the left and right hip and buttocks are medically indicated. The patient has marked existing skin laxity of the upper arms, and treatment with liposuction will require skin excision, and marked existing skin laxity of the thighs, likely from a prior liposuction, and further fat removal with liposuction will require skin excision. Therefore, excisions of the bilateral tissue of the thighs and upper arms are medically necessary for the treatment of this patient. The California reconstructive surgery statute requires health insurers to cover reconstructive surgeries, defined as surgery performed to correct or repair abnormal structures of the body caused by congenital defects, developmental abnormalities, trauma, infection, tumors, or disease to do either of the following: (1) to improve function; (2) to create a normal appearance, to the extent possible. Lipedema is an abnormal structure of the body caused by a developmental abnormality or disease. The purpose of the liposuction and skin excision of the thighs and upper arms is to improve function and to create a normal appearance, to the extent possible. Therefore, bilateral leg liposuction, anterior thighs, knees and calves, bilateral leg liposuction, posterior thighs, knees and calves, bilateral arm liposuction, liposuction of the left and right hip and buttocks, and excisions of the bilateral tissue of the thighs and upper arms are medically necessary for the treatment of this patient and reconstructive in nature. Final Result: The reviewer determined that a portion of the requested services are medically necessary for the treatment of the patient's medical condition and are reconstructive in nature. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be partially overturned.Credentials/Qualifications: The reviewer is board-certified in plastic surgery and is actively practicing. The reviewer is an expert in the treatment of the patient’s medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
