CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF MANAGED HEALTH CARE
INDEPENDENT MEDICAL REVIEW (IMR) DECISION — REDACTED
Source: CHHS Open Data Portal
Reference ID: EI25-45153
Report Year: 2025
Diagnosis Category: Cancer / Breast
Treatment Category: Diag Imag & Screen / Genetic/Genomic Test
IMR Type: Experimental/Investigational
Patient: age 41 to 50, gender Female
Days to review: 7     Days to adopt: 25
Determination: Upheld Decision of Health Plan
----------------------------------------------------------

FINDINGS

Findings:  The physician reviewer found that a patient has requested authorization and coverage for Natera Inc. Signatera circulating tumor deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecular residual disease testing. Standard surveillance of non-metastatic breast cancer includes taking a history, clinical examination, and annual imaging. The use of circulating tumor cells (CTC) or circulating tumor DNA is not recommended by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, even in the context of surveillance in metastatic breast cancer. There is a lack of high-quality data showing that this information improves outcomes in early breast cancer. In this clinical setting, the requested service is not likely to be more beneficial than standard surveillance with a history, physical, and annual imaging for the patient’s medical condition. Therefore, Natera Inc. Signatera circulating tumor DNA molecular residual disease testing is not likely to be more beneficial for the evaluation of the patient's condition than any available standard therapy. Findings: Three of the three reviewers found that the requested Natera Inc. Signatera circulating tumor DNA molecular residual disease testing is not likely to be more beneficial for the evaluation of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy.Final Result: The reviewers determined that the requested service is not likely to be more beneficial for the evaluation of the patient's medical condition than any available standard therapy. Therefore, the Health Plan's denial should be upheld.Credentials/Qualifications: Reviewers 1, 2, and 3 are board-certified in internal medicine with subspecialty certifications in medical oncology and hematology and are actively practicing. The reviewers are experts in the treatment of the patient’s medical condition and knowledgeable about the proposed treatment through recent or current actual clinical experience treating those with the same or a similar medical condition.
